# Statistical Consulting Home Page

As a researcher, you need to be sure your conclusions are sound and supported
by data. The best way to do this is to involve a statistician. As a statistical
consultant, I can provide guidance at every stage, from proposal writing and
designing experiments, to data collection and validation, all the way to the
final data analysis and ensuring results are communicated in an understandable
manner.

I have been collaborating with scientific and academic researchers since 2016,
contributing to projects ranging from health surveys to animal behavior
experiments. I also did graduate research in the statistical mapping of
unexploded ordnance at weapons testing sites. Additionally, I have extensive
experience with cloud computing and enterprise-scale databases, so I am
prepared to tackle any data-related issue you may have. Have a look at my
[CV](kflagg-cv).

If you are interested in bringing me onto your project as a statistical
practitioner, I will be happy to schedule a free 45-minute consultation to
discuss your needs. [Email me](mailto:flagg.ka@gmail.com) to get started!


# Resources


## About Kenny

When not doing statistics or data science, I am often traveling or doing swing
and Latin dancing. However, this site is mostly about my professional
activities.

- [My CV](kflagg-cv)


## INLA

Here are some assorted vignettes and slide decks from my doctoral research
applying the integrated nested Laplace transform to spacial point patterns.

- [Example code from my INLA tutorial](https://github.com/kflagg/jas-inla-review)
- [INLA demo slides](manuscript2/presentations/inlademo.html)
- [INLA spatial prediction vignette](manuscript2/vignettes/prediction.html)
- [Three Minute Thesis slides](flagg-3min.html)


## Python

While working in business data science, I had to migrate from R to Python. I
have an ongoing side project to create a curriculum for people with statistical
training to learn to do data analysis in Python.

- [Python curriculum](https://kflagg.gitbook.io/pythonds/) **(work in progress)**

