---
title: "More About Terminology And Consulting"
---


Usage and thought around data have changed radically over the last several
decades. I am a statistician by training, a data scientist by trade, and have
picked up assorted data engineering and cloud software development skills
throughout my career. Modern data practitioners need to fill more roles than
ever before, so this post explains how I see myself in each of these.


## Statistician

I design experiments and studies, conduct appropriate and honest analyses
thereof, build models to predict outcomes from potential new data, and help
decide how much and what sort of data are required to test a hypothesized
result that would be of practical interest. I have a Ph.D. in statistics from
Montana State University, Bozeman, where I taught introductory statistics for
three semesters and worked as a statistics research assistant for three years.


## Data Scientist

This is a trendy rebranding of "statistician" that typically implies a focus
on enterprise-scale predictive modeling at the expense of the other things
stated above. This usually entails computing large quantities of statistical
insights, making them available inside of software, and assuring quality of
the outputs. Compared to statisticians, data scientists are more likely to
use black-box deep learning techniques, but traditional statistical models and
classifiers still make up the majority of "data science" applications. As of
this writing, I held the job title of "data scientist" or "data science
consultant" at two different companies spanning nearly 5 years.


## Data Engineer

Enterprise organizations frequently require a division of labor between (1)
the data scientists who use tools to analyze, summarize, and make decisions
using data, and (2) the engineers who manage connections to datastores and
software consumption layers, while writing rigorous code to efficiently move
data from one location to another in the required format. The toolkit of the
data engineer has more in common with that of the software engineer than that
of the data scientist, and sometimes overlaps with that of the database
administrator. At my previous data scientist positions, I gained experience
with data engineering while projects were in early phases and the need for a
dedicated engineer was not yet realized.


## Putting It Together

I am able and happy to consult on all of these types of projects. For a pure
statistical research project, I would be pleased to be involved in each phase:
design, analysis, and conclusion/dissemination. The turnaround for each phase
can be relatively quick (a few weeks, largely based upon your timeline, but
filtered through my workload of other obligations).

For a data science/engineering project, we will need to do extensive
requirements gathering up-front to understand what state your data
collection/storage systems are in, what new build may be necessary, and if I
am the best person to do the engineering work. A proof-of-concept may be
necessary to determine if your request is even possible at scale, and these
projects can take 4-8 months to fully complete. I can do all the data science
build, much of the data engineering build, and may be able to assist with an
app build. However, in the event that I am not able to complete your project,
I am versed in project management and will assist in writing requirements for
later work potentially done by other teams. I can also provide referrals to
colleagues at consulting firms with larger teams.

We are in an exciting era where analysts who were taught that 70-year-old
statistical techniques are the only way to do things are discovering the power
of brand new methods, while large data warehousing organizations are seeing
the value of simple statistics applied at scale. I am excited to be at the
center of this intersection.

